Hi Lynne

I saw your piece in KW and I had two thoughts: it's a brave and unusual move by the editors to include "contentious politics"; your piece brings erudite and important facts and perspectives to the forefront.

The problem as I see it is that those open to reason and evidence, voted to remain in the EU. Many but not all will also have an appreciation of the history and significance of the "European project", the ECHR, the 1951 Refugee convention and so on. Of those voting to leave (I haven't got data to support my claims although I have got a reasonable amount of personal experience) some used reason and evidence to support their position but most were operating on a basis I'd characterise as "identity politics".

In the runup to the referendum I listened to many ordinary voters and I have to say I found it to be a rather depressing exercise. Of all the reasons given for voting leave, the one I came across which seemed to me to be an unassailable rationale was from an  ex-serviceman who said "I was stationed in Germany for many years. I bloody hate the Germans, I'm voting to leave". Other rationales all fell away at the first hurdle: were the argument's premises true? When listening to complaints about the "bloody EU" I found that the actual culprit was almost always the British government.

The "average Englishman" is, in my experience, a very strange character. We have remarkable double-standards and only meagre levels of self-awareness. One Leaver voted leave because "there's too many Poles over here and now we're getting Romanians and Bulgarians as well." After the referendum, he asked me whether I thought that Brexit would make his life-long dream of retiring to Spain difficult.

In 2018 I was in Belgium with a group of UK and continental bikers on a trip marking the centenary of the Armistice. We Brits were asked which way we'd voted and why. It was a very telling exercise. A mixture of Leavers and Remainers, everyone apart from me fell into one of two groups. Group one said something along the lines of "I just think it'll be better in/out". Group two said "I considered [some aspects of] membership and decided in/out". I wasn't surprised as I'd already encountered pretty much all those positions anyway but it's astonishing to me that this group of laymen (not diplomats, not politicians, not economists.) clearly thought themselves up to the task of analysing 50 years worth of complex international treaties, bearing in mind that in 2015 most of them were barely aware of the EU and also bearing in mind that there was no clearly defined alternative to membership offered.

I approached the question of which way to vote rather differently. I made no attempt to decide whether "in" was better than "out" or vice-versa, instead I asked myself three questions: 1) is the status quo so bad that I feel the need to change it? 2) is the case being made for change credible and persuasive to me? 3) do those advocating change seem to me to be competent, honest and reliable? My answer in each case was "no" so I voted to remain.

As I see it there has been a serious failure of politics over the last, at least, 20 years and I think that FPTP voting is quite probably a major enabler if not actual cause of the failure. Politicians have repeatedly failed to bring the public with them. Blair was guilty of that with respect to Iraq and EU enlargement. Brown was openly dismissive of public opinion. Cameron was a weak leader, with no balls (pardon my French) either on wars (Libya, Syria) or the EU. May was always, in my opinion, at best a second-rate politician and when she became Prime Minister she was clearly way out of her depth and should have been "resigned" some while before the party actually got around to it.

In normal times (I'd like to think anyway), Johnson would have been slung out of the party altogether - a serial liar, bully and bluffer not to mention his blatant philandering. James Arbuthnot (MP for NE Hants 1997-2015) in one of his final Commons debates (Local govt (Religious etc observances) Bill. Jan 2015) said:

"I was christened and confirmed, but since then I have lost those beliefs and the faith that I once had, and I am perfectly comfortable with that. This is the first time, however, that I have ever acknowledged that in public. It may be true that the pressure on a Conservative politician in particular to keep quiet about not being religious is very similar to the pressure that there has been about keeping quiet about being gay. For the avoidance of doubt, I am not gay either, but I just want to say that it is telling that it has taken me 28 years in this House—and, frankly, the knowledge that I will not be standing at the next election—to make this point. I remember that when Peter Walker was a Minister answering questions in the House, he was asked something like whether his motivation for supporting a particularly right-wing policy had been sycophancy or cowardice, and his answer was, “Almost certainly both.” I would like to give the same answer for my having kept quiet about not being religious."

I think that says things about the character of Tory MPs but also about the party itself. In today's party, he's made Prime Minister! Unlike his predecessors though, he did bring the public with him. He did it, in my opinion, by the classic Johnson route of saying whatever he thought his audience wanted to hear and they certainly wanted to hear it. I was delivering LibDem leaflets for the 2019 general election and "Get Brexit Done" was exactly what they wanted to hear, some because they were Leavers but many because they were just fed up with it dragging on and on. Nobody cared about the details, let's just get it over with!

It's not all the fault of the Tories. They couldn't have got away with it without a completely useless opposition. Unfortunately FPTP made the outcome inevitable.

My personal experience of explaining history and/or international obligations leads me to suppose that what's needed is for the general public to buy into the idea that we should not routinely elect amoral individuals to positions of power and that we also need to do a much better job of explaining actual history rather than allowing people to reminisce, inaccurately, about the good old days. My baby brother is of the opinion that a good start on the road to Nirvana would be to ban the sale of newspapers or alternatively ensure that nobody is allowed to read only one.

It's too early to try fixing Brexit. For the bulk of the population, nothing actually changed until 1st Jan this year and most of the changes are still "somebody else's problem". As and when those issues become personal they will have been caused by the EU or other foreigners long before anyone puts the blame where it actually belongs. Without wishing suffering on anyone, I think that that's probably what's needed before there's any chance of bringing reason back to the matter of international relations and good governance. I made the mistake a few months ago of referring to Brexit in a letter to our illustrious MP not, you understand, arguing that it had been a mistake but in the hope that Johnson could be persuaded to stop treating the negotiations like a game. Damian told me that "we left the EU on 31st Jan and the time for making such arguments was before the referendum". He's a Tory MP, what else would you expect but he's no fool and he wouldn't be taking that line if he didn't think that local opinion, and votes, was on his side.

I hope your KW piece attracts some publishable responses but I'm not optimistic. We can but try though, keep up the good work and don't let me dampen your enthusiasm.